In order to truly understand the value of data structures we have to go deep down into the way computer
works at the fundamental level.
In order for a computer to run code he needs to keep track of things like variables like numbers strings
or array these variables are stored in what we call random access memory or RAM for short.
That's how programs run.
We remembered this from space complexity video right on top that we also have storage where we store
things like our video files music files documents and this storage can be a disk drive a flash drive
or a solid state drive.
Data storage is permanent or will be called persistent.
So when you turn off your laptop or computer it's still going to be there when you turn it back on in
RAM you lose the memory when the computer turns off.
So why wouldn't we just always use storage.
So we don't lose any data.
Well the problem is that persistent storage is slow because you see a computer is run by its C.P. you
can think of the C-p as the little worker that does all the calculations that we need.
It does the actual work inside our computer.
And this you needs access to the RAM and the storage but it can access the RAM and the information and
the ram a lot faster.
But let me give you an example as if we're using Google when we run Google Chrome for example browser
that Google Chrome browser has a piece of code.
Now here I've simplified it and we just have a variable A equals one.
We're just assigning this variable one but we can imagine how we have hundreds or thousands of lines
of code of Google Chrome.
Now in order for our computer to run Google Chrome we run the CPI for it to do so.
Now when a variable is declared in let's say script to run Google Chrome it's going to hold that in
memory and our Random Access Memory.
But once we turn off or close Google Chrome we want to be able to re open it.
Right.
Well that's what we do when we save an application on our computer.
We save it to storage so that next time we open up a Google Chrome the CPQ is going to grab the program
from the storage so that it can use it again.
And for Google Chrome to run fast and run smaller scripts it's going to keep that information and random
access memory we can see this on our computers as well.
If I go to about this Mac my computer we can see here that we have the processor which is my CPQ we
have my memory which is my RAM and if I go to storage This is my flash storage my persistent storage
on my computer.
So you can think of RAM in the computer as a massive storage area kind of like a data structure rate
Well this massive storage area has shelves that are numbered.
We called these address or addresses and it's a really really big shelf that holds a lot of information
and it allows us to run programs on our computer Now each of these shelves holds what we call eight
bits or numbers.
If you see here one two three four five six seven eight each one of these numbers is a bit and a bit
is a tiny electrical switch that can be turned on or off.
But instead of calling it on or off we call it 1 or 0 and 8 bits is called a byte.
Each shelf has one byte of storage and the CPQ is connected to something called a memory controller
and a memory controller does the actual reading of this memory as well as writing this memory because
sometimes the shelf might be blank and doesn't have anything.
Now this direct connection to the C-p is important because the C-p you asks the REM hey what's in shelf
number zero.
And the memory controller actually has connections individually to all of these shelfs again that's
really important because it means that we can access the zero shelf and immediately access the seven
shelf or ten thousand seven hundred and eighty one shelf without having to climb down or step down.
That's what the name random access memory means.
We can access memory really fast because we have these connections and each shelf we want we just need
to know which shelf we're looking for we can access the bits at any random address in memory right away.
Even though this memory controller can jump between far apart memory addresses really fast programs
tend to access memory that is nearby.
The closer the information is to the C.P. you and the less the has to travel the faster a program can
run.
So computers are actually tuned to get extra speed boosts when reading memory dresses.
That are close to each other for a computer to access zero and one is a lot faster than a computer.
For it to Access 0 and 1000 because these are a lot closer together.
And to further optimize this are computers also have.
We call ACP you cash where the CPQ has a tiny tiny memory where is stores a copy of stuff that is really
really recent.
And this is called a cache coming one day you might here is something called Air LRU cache.
So again if we use Google Chrome as an example we turn on google chrome with what say we have the application
download it on our storage C.P. you loads it up and because we've visited Hacker News dot com it's going
to load up the information for that Hacker News and put it into memory or maybe even cache if it can
hold.
So why is this important for data structures.
Data Structures are Remember ways for us to store information.
For example if we want to store a variable A equals one well in our modern computers usually we represent
integers.
That is the number one in 32 bits.
That is this block size of RAM.
And by the way this is now can be 64 bits with more and more recent upgrades.
But this way we can store the number one within this blocks of 32 bits y 32 bits because 8 bits which
is one byte times one two three four so eight times four is thirty two bits.
We can store 32 bits of information and this bit of one you can see here is 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 and 1
is stored now in memory 0 1 2 3 or the address 0 1 2 3.
If we have another variable be equal to 7 we would store it in the next block over here in our ram.
In doing this you can now think about how systems that are 8 it can hold 255 bits of information things
that are 16 bit while they can hold a lot more information.
And now we have systems that are 32 bits you can see here that we can hold a ton of information and
then if we had 64 bits that is instead of having four little shelves over here we have eight shelfs
shelfs times eight bits.
Well that's a lot of information that we can store and the bigger This is the more diverse that information
is.
If we had an 8 bit system.
Well the number 256 we can really store that.
That's really hard to do.
And I can demonstrate this to you with javascript.
You see there's something called integer overflow.
Now javascript technically doesn't have integers it only has what we call a 64 bit floats but the idea
is that a computer can only store a certain number of information so using this syntax in javascript
we have Mathcad now which is a function that returns the base to the ex-porn in power.
That is the first parameter is the base to the power of the second parameter.
So we can create really large numbers like math.
Power.
So 5 to the power of 100.
If I run this we see the number over here.
If I increase this to let's say 6 again another large number.
Now what if I keep going and change this to six to the power of a thousand we get infinity.
What is that.
Well as the number becomes too large to store in our RAM then we need to represent this number that
we cannot store into something that is tangible and javascript's case it is infinity.
We can only store this much information and no matter how big I make this any number above a certain
threshold is going to just say infinity.
How cool is that.
Now lets go back to the slides.
I showed you all this because other data types other than numbers work the same way each data type has
a number of bits associated with it and that needs to get stored in the system and the system allocates
data storage and then the CPQ reads from that storage.
Now I'll leave a link for you after this video so that you can get more information if you want.
We don't want to get too deep in this but a data structure is this a data structure is an arrangement
of data.
You can define the way you interact with this data and how it is arranged in RAM so some data structures
in RAM are organized right next to each other.
Some are organized apart from each other and they have different pros and cons on access.
And right.
Our goal is to minimize the operation that we need to do for the s.p you get the information for you
to write information.
And that is why data structures are so powerful.
We're thinking about the low level and I don't know by you but this to me when I learned about this
was really really exciting because we have a way now to think how data structures actually affect the
process of our computers and how we can use what we know about computers now to write great code.
I'll see in the next video.